Collaborative Research: RUI: The Neural Basis of Becoming a Parent: From Genotype to Phenotype
==============================================================================================

[Award Abstract
\#1455957](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1455957&HistoricalAwards=false)

Important changes in behavior occur with the transition to parenthood.
For animals that exhibit parental care, raising offspring successfully
involves transitioning from aggressive and sexual behaviors to more
caring and nurturing ones. However, it is not clear how the brain brings
about this transition. In a rapidly changing world, understanding how
the environment affects the brain and how the brain affects the
behavioral transition into parental care will shed light on how changes
in environment can ultimately affect how all organisms reproduce. In an
interdisciplinary collaboration between Drs. Calisi-Rodríguez and
MacManes they will characterize changes in gene expression and specific
protein levels in important tissues essential for reproduction, namely
the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads, in the rock dove (Columba
livia) during the transition into parental care behaviors. Like most
birds, rock doves incubate eggs, but are also unique in that they
“lactate” to feed their young, showing stereotypical avian and mammalian
parental behaviors. This makes doves a potentially powerful theoretical
bridge to understand the neurobiology of transitions into parenting.
Drs. Calisi-Rodríguez and MacManes will generate a large genomic dataset
and identify critical genes involved in important stages of parental
care. The results will have broad potential applications including the
management of captive breeding for conservation or agricultural
purposes, and to inform the study of neural deficiencies in
parent-offspring bonding. In addition, the researchers will develop and
host an annual summer program, “Summer City Science”, to expose high
school students from low-income neighborhoods and underrepresented
backgrounds who excel in the sciences to a range of scientific fields.
This will provide students the opportunity to work closely and
personally with faculty, and their research and labs. Students in both
the Calisi-Rodríguez and MacManes labs will help to serve as mentors and
instructors for Summer City Science to increase the scope of the
training of all parties involved. The overall wider objective of this
program is to broaden participation in science, creating a more
efficient and diverse workforce.

Previous research has implicated specific hormones that play a role in
the maintenance of parental care behavior in vertebrates, including
oxytocin and vasopressin (avian homologs: mesotocin and vasotocin),
vasoactive intestinal peptide, and prolactin. However, very little is
known about when and how the brain transitions into parental care
behavior in any vertebrate, and this knowledge is fundamentally
important to understand the mechanisms that mediate parental care. The
Principal Investigator, during her tenure as an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow,
discovered that the hypothalamic neurohormone, gonadotropin inhibitory
hormone (GnIH), caused significant changes in abundance of GnIH
containing cells in both birds and mammals during the transition to
parental care. Here, the researchers propose to expand this knowledge
using classic offspring removal and replacement manipulations to uncover
the role of GnIH during the transition to parental care behavior. In
addition to this targeted approach, they propose a powerful untargeted
approach to explore what other changes in the brain may be occurring
during this transition. They will use high-throughput sequencing
technology and immunohistochemistry to uncover all genetic and specific
proteomic changes in the brain, along with their relationship to GnIH,
which occur during the transition to parental care. This project will
build on previous work, and the data gathered will yield the most
complete characterization and understanding of changes in neural
transcription and translation reported to date in any vertebrate during
the transition to parental care. All data and computer code will be made
publicly available in established repositories and shared with the
scientific community.
